We can also decompose portfolio return,
also called P&L or profit and loss.
If we sum up the asset returns in a weighted sum using the holdings vector as weights,
we have the portfolio P&L for one time period.
Let's substitute in the multifactor model expression for r. Here,
we can substitute the exposure vector in for h transpose B.
We again see that there's a term in this expression due to
the idiosyncratic component and terms due to each factor.
All we are saying in this expression is that
the portfolio profit and loss can be accounted for by
the part of the P&L due to factors and
the remaining piece which covers what isn't explained by any factors.
Note that in this expression,
we assume that the sum over factors is over both risk and Alpha factors.
So although in previous parts of the course,
we left the Alpha factors out of the exposure and factor return matrices B and f,
here we include them.
So in the sum,
a few of the E and f terms represent the Alpha factors,
and the others represent the risk factors.
However, we expect the contribution to the P&L from risk factors to be
minimal because we designed our portfolio to
have as little exposure as possible to risk factors.
The ability to decompose portfolio P&L in this way can be very powerful.
The idiosyncratic term can be considered to be explained by individual stock selection.
This term will be large if the stocks chosen have
large idiosyncratic return or return unexplained by the factors.
The portfolio P&L may enlarge part B attributable to exposures to factors,
and this is where the performance attribution can be especially illuminating.
For example, a portfolio manager might think
that their superior returns are due to stock selection
when in reality their research process is leading them
to stocks with large exposures to the market or momentum,
and it could be that after controlling for these effects,
the value add is zero or negative.
However, you should probably think of this expression as ideal P&L in the sense that it's
what we'd earn if we could execute at
the midpoint price at the time the order was constructed.
This could be very inaccurate because it doesn't take
into account the impact our trades had on the market.